# GenomeScope
Fast genome analysis from unassembled short reads

Current developments in de novo assembly technologies have been focused on relatively simple genomes. Even the human genome, with a heterozygosity rate of only ~0.1% and 2n diploid structure, is significantly simpler than many other species, especially plants. However, genomics is rapidly advancing towards sequencing more complex species such as pineapple, sugarcane, or wheat that have much higher rates of heterozygosity (>1% for pineapple), much higher ploidy (8n for sugarcane), and much larger genomes (16Gbp for wheat).

One of the first goals when sequencing a new species is determining the overall characteristics of the genome structure, including the genome size, abundance of repetitive elements, and the rate of heterozygosity. These features are needed to study trends in genome evolution, and can inform the parameters that should be used for the individual assembly steps. They can also serve as an independent quality control during any analysis, such as quantifying the quality of an assembly, or measuring the expected number of heterozygous bases in the genome before mapping any variants.

We have developed an analytical model and open-source software package GenomeScope that can infer the global properties of a genome from unassembled sequenced data. GenomeScope uses the k-mer count distribution, e.g. from Jellyfish, and within seconds produces a report and several informative plots describing the genome properties. We validate the approach on simulated heterozygous genomes, as well as synthetic crosses of related strains of microbial and eukaryotic genomes with known reference genomes. GenomeScope was also applied to study the characteristics of several novel species, including pineapple, pear, the regenerative flatworm Macrostomum lignano, and the Asian sea bass.

Online version is available here:
http://qb.cshl.edu/genomescope/

VCF files of the variants identified in the larger genomes are available here:
http://labshare.cshl.edu/shares/schatzlab/www-data/genomescope/vcf/


## Frequently Asked Questions (FAQ)

> Q:  As mentioned in the Supplementary Notes and Figures 1.3.2 Genome Size Estimation, the haploid genome size is estimated by: "This estimate is revised by summing the total number of k-mers, except presumptive sequencing errors identified as in section 1.3.1, and dividing by the 2*λ, the estimated coverage for homozygous k-mers". If I understand it correctly, λ is the mean of a distribution, the estimated coverage for homozygous k-mers; and in the genomescope profile, kcov is the estimated coverage for heterozygous kmers. 
Could you explain how genomescope estimates haploid genome size, specifically why dividing by 2 times of the estimated coverage for homozygous k-mers?

A: Thank you for writing. I think there is a bit of confusion over the variable names and how they relate to each other. The first thing to note is λ and kcov refer to the same value, just that we use λ in the written document and kcov in the code. The modeling tries to identify 4 peaks centered at λ, 2*λ, 3*λ, and 4*λ. These 4 peaks correspond to the mean coverage levels of the unique heterozygous, unique homozygous, repetitive heterozygous and repetitive homozygous sequences, respectively. So when it estimates the haploid genome size, it divides by the 2*λ, which is the average homozygous coverage, not "2 times the estimated coverage for homozygous k-mers" as you write.

The other confusing aspect is what is meant by haploid genome size versus diploid genome size. We consider the haploid genome size to mean the span of one complete set of haploid chromosomes and the diploid genome size to be the span of both haploid copies (total DNA content in one diploid cell). In particular, in a human cell, the haploid genome size is about 3Gbp and the diploid genome size is about 6Gbp. If you sequence a total of 300Gbp for a human genome, that would be about 150Gbp (50x coverage) of the maternal haplotype and about 150Gbp (50x coverage) of the paternal haplotype. But since the heterozygosity rate in humans is so low, the main peak in the distribution would be centered around 100x. However, GenomeScope will still try to fit the 4 peaks, so should set the heterozygous kmer coverage λ equal to 50x, and thus the homozygous coverage to 2*λ = 100x. From this GenomeScope will compute the haploid genome size as the total amount of sequence data (300GB) divided by the homozygous coverage (100x) to report 3Gbp as expected. Kmers with higher coverage are naturally scaled as well: kmers that occur 200 or 300 times in the kmer profile (and thus are 2 or 3 copy repeats in the diploid genome, 4 or 6 times in the haploid sequences) are still scaled by 100x to contribute 2 or 3 copies to the estimate. Finally, note that if the two haplotypes have significantly different lengths, then the reported haploid genome size will be the average of the two.
